Family Laws encompass the broad set of rules that are in practice regarding family matters, such as marriage, divorce, inheritance etc. There are some legally enforceable rights and duties that arise when one gives legal validation to the status of interpersonal relationships.
The justification for having laws that affect the most private aspects of our life is to ensure protection of individual rights and to uphold certain norms that are essential to human dignity. Another reason is that laws act as agents of social change and may succeed in improving the status of individuals in society.
 
Where are the legal principles embodied in these laws derived from?
There are five broad sets of family laws in India – Hindu law, which governs all Hindus as also Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs; Muslim law for the Muslims; Christian law for the Christians; Parsi law for the Parsi’s and a secular law i.e. the Special Marriage Act. The religion-based laws are derived from religious texts. These laws have also been amended from time to time by parliamentary legislation.
Hindu law has been substantially altered on account of extensive legislation enacted post-independence. Christian and Parsee laws have been changed more recently in the last few decades through legislation. Muslim law has been the least modified and hence retains most of the text and interpretation of the times when its religious texts were written.
 
Hindu Law
 
A Hindu marriage is treated as a sacrament and not a contract. For a Hindu marriage to have legal validity, it must mandatorily be registered under the Hindu Marriage Act. There are some other conditions that must be fulfilled for a Hindu marriage for being legally valid. If a marriage is not legally valid, or contravenes certain grave aspects of the law which are specified in the Act, the marriage is automatically null and void and annulment can be granted to it. There are also some marriages that are voidable at the option of either party to the marriage.
1.	The bridegroom must be at least 21 years of age, and the bride must have attained the age of 18 years. However, if the couple or either the boy or girl have not attained the minimum required age for marriage and yet get married, it is not void. The marriage is voidable at the option of either party.
 
2.	Another aspect of a valid marriage is that close family relations in the ‘uterine’ or consanguine lineage are said to be within degrees of prohibited relationship and the match should not fall within the prohibited degrees.
Under Hindu law, the ‘degrees of prohibited relationship’ refers to the proximity of the two individuals through their lineal ascendants and the law states that a match may not be made within those degrees.
Point of interest!
This provision has a scientific basis as it is known that the offspring’s physical and mental health may be affected by the proximity of the relationship. However, if the custom or usage of either party permits the relationship, it will not be treated as an invalid marriage.
 
–> Example: Akash and Mira are consenting adults who decide to get married. They have a simple ceremony and get registered at the Marriage Registrar’s office. However, it is found that through a long-lost relative, Mira and Akash were previously related as 4th cousins. (They shared a set of great-great-great grandparents) Their marriage will not be valid under the Hindu Marriage Act.
3.	It is important that neither party has a spouse living at the time of marriage, as bigamy and polygamy are prohibited and are treated as offences under Indian criminal law.
 
4.	Also, it is necessary that both parties be of sound mind and capable of giving consent, and they should not be unfit for marriage and procreation of children. The law adds that neither party should be subject to recurrent attacks of insanity and epilepsy.
The law provides that any marriage that violates these conditions is voidable and may be nullified at the desire of the affected party.
–> Example: Kishore and Neha were married in the summer of 1994. While they cohabited, Kishore observed that Neha displayed symptoms of mental illness, as sometime she spouted random words and also acquired a glazed look in her eyes. He realized that her insanity resulted in a voidable marriage and took another wife.
He has not committed bigamy. An annulment is a retroactive provision. A nullified marriage is considered never to have existed at all. It, unlike divorce, declares the marriage void ab initio. 
There are two events that confirm the completion of the marriage, one is the solemnization of the marriage that takes place during the customary rites and ceremonies practiced by the parties and the other is the registration of the marriage.
Till recently it was not mandatory to register marriages, but the plight of deserted women seeking maintenance and custody of their children, without proof of a valid marriage, prompted the Supreme Court to direct the Centre and states to amend the legislations accordingly. Prevention of child marriage, bigamy and ease of litigation are other positive outcomes from the registration of marriage.
